doc/manifesto.md, before:

# Welcome to your new cult

Maybe it's time for something new.
Why not get real about what it means to be a computer programmer?
Like programming as a way of being, a creative download from the Universe.
Why isn't computer programming treated as a monastic calling?
Maybe that's where it all went wrong.
If you're up for it, you might consider...

- A monastic lifestyle, meaning:
- Celibacy, but including meditative practice.
- Living in a yoga center or other such conditioned space.
- You have to understand C well enough to see what `chad` does.

You are a blessing. A gift to God (or creation or universe or whathaveyou).
Each new day starts with you.
You create a feeling of gratitude and abundance.
It's like setting a pointer whose default setting is a kind of crappy
collective unconscious of the planet.
Nope, set that pointer every morning first thing after waking.
Take a long, deep breath, while thinking of how grateful you are to be alive
and how wonderful the possibilities of the new day are.
Upon exhaling, say "thank you". That's it.
Every morning, don't forget.
It affects your coding work greatly.
And your general attitude on life.

Perform a similar gratitude ritual upon sleeping so your brain can
do its best work while you sleep. Power naps can be great problem solvers.

If you're a coder, learn how to be a monk. Lots of resources on that.
Can't quite swing "living in a yoga center"?
You can consecrate your own space, but it will take some doing. 
The monastery guys (and gals) figured this out long ago.
Try the Isha foundation if you're secularly minded.

If you're looking for a cult leader, I'm probably not the guy.
I'm willing to learn from the legendary Charles H. Moore himself,
who didn't want to be one either. I only wrote `chad`.

If this is all just too much, stick with C.
You know, the language for writing operating systems.
Because computers were expensive and had to pay for themselves.
And, computer languages evolved out of the military.
An Admiral in the US Navy started this whole language business.
Let me guess. Your embedded app doesn't look much like an OS
and isn't designed to make things go *kaboom*.

It comes back to intent.
The whole way that industry uses computers.
That zeitgeist led to everyone on the planet having an ARM processor
in their hands.
How about that? The entire world is ARMed. 
It's Admiral Grace's intent writ large.
That's how intent works. The ripples keep on going.
How's everyone at each other's throats working for you?

How about waging peace?
How about we forget about ARM and its wannabes like RISC V?
They are all part of the same dying world.
It's rather ironic that Corona-virus could bring an empire built on C
to its knees.
Sorry, C is not the language of peace.
It's the language of commerce, or war without bullets as it's practiced.
But here's the thing about planetary consciousness shifts.
You have to roll with the tide.
Stop coding for war machines.

Tiny cores scale up. Need more power? Put in more cores.
Create a pool usage model like GPUs use.
A modern CPU could have thousands of `chad` cores,
each running at multi-GHz speeds.

If your code is so great, why shouldn't everyone on the planet be 
able to run it without it being hosted by
some military industrial complex derived CPU
accompanied by a ridiculously complex C tool-chain?
Building the silicon is a formality, the CPU can be simulated.
Which is fine. Did you build your code so sucky the time would matter?

No, let's get real. Let's get simple. Let's just build code.

The world is the way it is because we became disconnected from spirit.
We are spiritual beings. That's just how biology works,
with its integration with infinite timelessness.
Spiritual practices are sorely lacking in today's world.
Those practices don't have to be boring.
They are all about the flow mental state.
The flow state is a practice.
Programming is a very good practice.
Why not use a language that's built for it? 
Like Forth?

Commit message:

Defined Verilog for an MCU that boots from flash. Added boot-from-flash capability to simulator.

doc/manifesto.md, after:

# Welcome to your new cult

Okay, maybe not a cult. A cult shuns you when you leave. Computer programming
is jokingly referred to as a religion. Well, it kind of is, but so is culture
in general. There's a whole groupthink that goes along with the shadows on the
wall of Plato's cave.

Maybe it's time for something new.
Why not get real about what it means to be a computer programmer?
Like programming as a way of being, a creative download from the Universe.
Why isn't computer programming treated as a monastic calling?
Maybe that's where it all went wrong.
If you're up for it, you might consider...

- A monastic lifestyle, meaning:
- Celibacy, but including meditative practice.
- Living in a yoga center or other such conditioned space.

Nikola Tesla figured this out first, but here's my interpretation.

You are a blessing. A gift to God (or creation or universe or whathaveyou).
Each new day starts with you.
You create a feeling of gratitude and abundance.
It's like setting a pointer whose default setting is a kind of crappy
collective unconscious of the planet.
Nope, set that pointer every morning first thing after waking.
Take a long, deep breath, while thinking of how grateful you are to be alive
and how wonderful the possibilities of the new day are.
Upon exhaling, say "thank you". That's it.
Every morning, don't forget.
It affects your coding work greatly.
And your general attitude on life.

Perform a similar gratitude ritual upon sleeping so your brain can
do its best work while you sleep. Power naps can be great problem solvers.

If you're a coder, learn how to be a monk. Lots of resources on that.
Can't quite swing "living in a yoga center"?
You can consecrate your own space, but it will take some doing. 
The monastery guys (and gals) figured this out long ago.
Try the Isha foundation if you're secularly minded.

If you're looking for a cult leader, I'm probably not the guy.
I'm willing to learn from the legendary Charles H. Moore himself,
who didn't want to be one either. I only wrote `chad`.

## Oh jeez, one of the crazies.

Probably. But let's look at results.
I invented the Mirari Cold Plasma System, which was one big Cosmic Giggle.
We got everything right by accident because nobody can set out to build such
a thing. Nobody on this planet, anyway. But it happened.
When a miracle happens, shouldn't you figure out how it happened so everybody
can replicate it? Instead of going "Ima just ignore that".
I thought about it for years. I don't have a complete picture,
but I know enough to point the way. If you want to build something "from beyond",
you have to "go beyond".

Intent matters. It's the seed. Once the seed sprouts and grows, it's going to
remain the same tree. Forth was designed for exploration. Exploration of space,
the solar system, the bottom of the ocean.
If you are an explorer, Forth is for you.

Where did C come from?
It evolved out of Algol, which evolved out of the military computers.
An Admiral in the US Navy started this whole language business.
That zeitgeist led to everyone on the planet having an ARM processor
in their hands.
How about that? The entire world is ARMed. 
It's Admiral Grace's intent writ large.
That's how intent works. The ripples keep on going.
How's everyone at each other's throats working for you?

How about waging peace?
How about we forget about ARM and its wannabes like RISC V?
They are all part of the same dying world.
It's rather ironic that Corona-virus could bring an empire built on C
to its knees.
Sorry, C is not the language of peace.
It's the language of commerce, or war without bullets as it's practiced.
But here's the thing about planetary consciousness shifts.
You have to roll with the tide.
Stop coding for war machines.

Tiny cores scale up. Need more power? Put in more cores.
Create a pool usage model like GPUs use.
A modern CPU could have thousands of `chad` cores,
each running at multi-GHz speeds.
Although application-specific hardware is where Moore's Law is going.
`chad` molds like putty due to its simplicity.

If your code is so great, why shouldn't everyone on the planet be 
able to run it without it being hosted by
some military industrial complex derived CPU
accompanied by a ridiculously complex C tool-chain?
Building the silicon is a formality, the CPU can be simulated.
Which is fine. Did you build your code so sucky the time would matter?

No, let's get real. Let's get simple. Let's just build code.

The world is the way it is because we became disconnected from spirit.
We are spiritual beings. That's just how biology works,
with its integration with infinite timelessness.
Spiritual practices are sorely lacking in today's world.
Those practices don't have to be boring.
They are all about the flow mental state.
The flow state is a practice.
Programming is a very good practice.
Why not use a language that's built for it? 
Like Forth?
